# Asian palynological synthesis
## Authors
Kuber P. Bhatta, Ondřej Mottl, Vivian A. Felde, Suzette G.A. Flantua, Hilary H. Birks, Xianyong Cao, Fahu Chen, John-Arvid Grytnes, Alistair W. R. Seddon, H. John B. Birks

### Corresponding author
Kuber P. Bhatta (kuber.bhatta@uib.no)

## Abstract
Historical legacies can play an important role in influencing present-day ecosystem composition and dynamics. It is thus important to study and to understand the long-term dynamics of ecosystems and their properties. Analysis of major ecosystem properties during the Holocene using fossil pollen assemblages can provide valuable insights into past ecosystem dynamics by summarising ‘hidden’ features of the data, so-called pollen-assemblage properties – PAPs. Here we quantify eight PAPs for the entire continent of Asia at different spatial scales (grains) in terms of pollen-taxonomic richness, diversity (two measures), evenness (two measures), pollen-compositional turnover, pollen-compositional change, and rate of pollen-compositional change (RoC). We then performed regression tree (RT) partitioning of the PAP-estimates with respect to sample-age as a sole predictor and therefrom extracted the ‘change-point(s)’ (time or sample-age of each split in a regression tree or major change in a PAP). We estimated density of RT and MRT change-points in each 1000-year time bin during the Holocene to summarise their temporal trends.

We analysed 205 fossil pollen data-sets (sequences) throughout Asia using univariate and multivariate techniques to explore PAPs across space (patterns along latitude and longitude, in individual sequences, within and across climate zones, and within the whole continent) and time (temporal patterns of PAPs over past 12000 years). 

Total pollen-compositional turnover (range of the sample or ‘CaseR’ scores of the first DCCA axis) and change (number of MRT partitions) in each sequence reveal gradual spatial variation, with no or gradual curvilinear latitudinal patterns, whereas both generally decline with longitude. The only temporal pattern consistently displayed across individual sequences, climate zones as well as the entire continent is temporal compositional turnover, which declines linearly from the onset of Holocene to the present. Temporal patterns in other PAPs are heterogeneous across and within spatial scales of the study. However, those at coarser spatial scales are more pronounced and consistent within a particular spatial scale. Temporal patterns in major changes in PAPs (density of RT and MRT change-points) are highly heterogeneous at the sequence scale but are broadly consistent at the spatial scales of climate-zone and continent for all PAPs. At the climate-zone and continent scale, the density of RT change-points increases from the early- to mid-Holocene for all PAPs, whereas it mostly decreases from the mid-Holocene to the present.

Observed spatio-temporal patterns in PAPs are rather heterogeneous across the scales of study and are most likely responses to variations in regional environmental conditions, anthropogenic land-use, and their interactions over space and time. The patterns observed at the climate-zone and continental scales indicate that there may have been a gradual but congruent decline in major PAPs of compositional variation such as compositional turnover, rate of compositional change, and major temporal compositional changes (MRT) during the Holocene, especially during the most recent period of the late-Holocene. Consequently, vegetation in Asia might have become progressively more homogenous during recent millennia. However, the patterns may also be influenced, at least partly, by properties of the data, by the spatial distribution of the sequences, by un-uniformity in the temporal resolution of the samples within the sequences, by data-standardisation procedures, and by the approaches used to summarise PAP. Therefore, it is critically important to explore in detail the above-mentioned data properties and the consequences of different approaches to data standardisation and summarisation in future broad-scale analyses of PAPs and their potential for addressing critical research questions or for testing alternative hypotheses.
